PEPA aimst to provide further understanding on how animal populations respond to environmental change. Although the negative effects of environmental change on species persistence are well-documented, there has been limited attempts to discern the individual- and population-level mechanisms underlying these phenomena. As a result, there is a lack of consensus within and across taxa, with general patterns yet to be identified. This generates great uncertainty about how effective conservation strategies can be applied in practice. A crucial aspect that is often overlooked is that species persistence is the result of a series of local population dynamics, each driven by their traitsenvironment interactions. In parallel, it is often ignored that individuals within a population are not identical; rather there is intraspecific variation in traits and certain combinations of these traits' values resulting in individual phenotypes. This variation cannot be accurately captured by a single trait or combinations of traits simplified into a unique value (e.g. the mean, quantified at the species level). Furthermore, the impact of ecological change on evolutionary response has long been acknowledged. However, the converse, namely how evolutionary responses influence ecological dynamics, is predominantly neglected, both theoretically and empirically, despite its potential effect on population trends. PEPA provides an integrative framework in which species persistence is defined by local population-level dynamics, which in turn are driven by local phenotypic diversity and their adaptive responses to environmental change. PEPA’s core aim is to elucidate the processes that drive phenotypic (individual) variation at the population level and investigate how these variations influence population dynamics and, consequently, species persistence under global change. Decomposing variation in population persistence into contributions from both ecological and evolutionary processes is of fundamental concern, particularly in a world characterised by rapid responses to anthropogenic threats. By applying PEPA's conceptual framework, we will assess and contrast the relative importance of phenotypic diversity and its responses on population (species) persistence. 

PEPA will use butterflies as study system, given their recognised role as bioindicators, comparing phenotypic diversity and responses in populations under environmental change. We will use data of a set of spatiotemporal structured butterfly populations in urban areas. Urbanisation is used as a study system representing an abrupt environmental change, minimising environmental gradients and, thus, allowing proper detection of filtering processes and their consequent effects on phenotypes, and ultimately, on population dynamics. This framework ensures generalisation of the patterns and processes (e.g., similar patterns would arise in marginal populations facing new climatic conditions and spatial structuring due to range shifts in response to climate change).
